All right we focused quite a bit on drawing the vectors for electric fields produced by various objects
for example positive point charge here.
Case number one this is my point.
I COULD SAY THIS IS THE ELECTRIC FIELD produced by this one.
If it's a dipole I choose the point right over here I could say yeah the electric field points like
this away from the positive toward the negative and we just saw that for the parallel plate for the
parallel plate.
If I draw the electric field vector anywhere for example right here at this point it would point away
from the positive toward the negative.
Now if you start doing this at all different points around the objects you know it can kind of take
a long time because you really have to go everywhere in space and start drawing the vector right as
you kind of start going away from the point charge you'd have to make the vector a little bit smaller.
Right.
Always pointing away from it.
All right if I go all the way over here again pointing away from it it would be something like this.
So typically what people do is they don't really plot the vectors everywhere.
What we do instead is we plot electric field lines and this is kind of what they look like.
Again you can imagine having all these vectors here kind of spaced out and what we're gonna do is we're
simply going to loops.
Let's let's use the marker instead what we're gonna do here is we're going to simply produce lines or
connect these vectors by lines.
OK.
The lines are continuous.
So they would kind of look like this or imagine all of these vectors here pointing along this orange
line.
And this is going to be a different representation of the same electric field so we call these electric
field lines.
So for a point charge they would look like this.
Now we have to give a direction to them.
So the direction that we're going to pick again it's going to be the same thing.
First of all they're going to point away from positive point charges.
OK.
So that's the direction.
So that's kind of easy to remember it's the same as the vectors and these are called electric field
lines.
Notice they are just continuous lines.
OK.
There's no kind of break here between them.
The other thing that we notice about them is the electric field lines they never cross.
They're kind of all independent lines.
The other thing we wanted to know is well if we have a vector for electric field not only do we know
the direction but we also know kind of how big it is just from the length.
How about electric field lines.
And if you're given a picture of electric field lines how do you know where the field is the biggest
hit.
Well all you have to do then is consider like a play a point or an area that's close to this charge.
Right.
If you consider over here right over here you could see I have two field lines that cross this area
whereas over here in space if I draw kind of the same area you see I only have one over here.
So then when you have a large number of field lines that cross an area that tells you where the field
is the biggest.
OK.
So you have to look at it so close the charges you're going to have a lot of field lines that are closely
spaced when you get far away.
You see the field lines here are farther apart.
So that means that the electric field is smaller
OK an electric field over here is bigger because the field lines are close together.
Let's have a look at the dipole field lines.
I want to go ahead and draw them.
I'm going to move it over a little bit just so we can have a bit more space and let's draw what the
electric field lines look like everywhere in space.
I'll make them an orange.
All right.
So between the charges it's pretty straightforward just the straight line and that's the direction.
Now as I start going a little bit off axis over here they start to bend like this.
And again they go from positive to negative.
These are what the electric field lines look like.
All right let me draw a few more.
You even have some that curl quite a bit.
Notice that they're closely spaced between the charges as I go farther out they're not as closely space
so that means that the electric field out here is smaller than it is between the charges and there's
some that are going to extend quite far away.
Just not going to draw them because they're gonna be out of the picture.
These are what the electric field lines look like for this dipole.
All right.
So what if you're given an electric field line and somebody asks you Well what is the electric field
direction right here.
How would you find the electric field direction right here.
So the rule is that the electric field direction I'm going to draw right here this would be the electric
field at this point P right here in THE ELECTRIC FIELD IS ALWAYS tangent to the field line.
So that's kind of also an important rules they never cross.
Another rule here is always tangent to the field lines.
That's the electric field direction.
Let me give you another example.
What if somebody asks you what is the electric field direction right here.
Okay.
You draw a tangent to that line.
That would be the electric field direction right here and that's the direction you would find is if
you included the electric field from both of them you use superposition.
You would find a vector that points in that direction.
You notice right between them.
In this case tangent to the field line is just along the field line because it's straight to the electric
field out over here.
Tangent to the field line Okay so that's how you could plot the direction the magnitude we know it's
where they're closely spaced or they're farther apart the field is smaller actually I should have made
this vector here probably a little bit smaller.
All right.
How do they look now for the parallel plate.
Let me move over the plates a little bit.
Boom.
All right let me draw what the field lines look like.
We'll do a mono orange again.
OK.
We said the field was constant between the plates all right.
So it kind of looks like this.
So a lot of people would just draw field lines that start from positive and they end at negative.
They can't just end anywhere.
They really have to end on positive charges negative charges.
They start from positive and that the negative charges.
All right and these lines should be uniformly spaced.
Fill in the gaps are these are approximately uniformly spaced which means that the field over here is
the same as the field over here.
Right.
It really doesn't matter.
I get the same number of field lines that would cross this area.
The field is uniform.
Imagine here I have some plates but they're not kind of super big.
Outside over here would kind of look like a dipole.
We get this kind of fringing field.
Again this is just a sketch.
Most of the problems that you're going to deal with in class are going to assume that the charges are
inside over here where the field is constant.
But in reality once you're at the edges the fields actually kind of do something like this.
We call these fringing fields
OK.
You draw one more OK so something like this.
All right.
So a lot of times you're just going to be given diagrams of electric field lines and they might ask
you which point at a given point what is the direction of the field always tangent to the field line.
Got to know where the field is strongest just look where it's dense densely packed.
The other thing fields field lines always point away from positive and they have to end that negative.
It would be incorrect if I did something like this.
Just start a field line here and just end it right here.
This is this guy here is not correct.
It has to end on the negative charge.